Barack Hussein Obama II is an American politician who served as the 44th President of the United States from 2009 to 2017.
Barack Hussein Obama II is the first African American to have served as president, as well as the first born outside the contiguous United States.
Barack Hussein Obama II previously served in the U.S. Senate representing Illinois from 2005 to 2008, and in the Illinois State Senate from 1997 to 2004.
Barack Hussein Obama II was born in Honolulu, Hawaii, two years after the territory was admitted to the Union as the 50th state.
Barack Hussein Obama II grew up mostly in Hawaii, but also spent one year of Barack Hussein Obama II's childhood in Washington State and four years in Indonesia.
After graduating from Columbia University in 1983, Barack Hussein Obama II worked as a community organizer in Chicago.
In 1988 Obama enrolled in Harvard Law School, where Barack Hussein Obama II was the first black president of the Harvard Law Review.
After graduation, Barack Hussein Obama II became a civil rights attorney and professor, teaching constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004.
Barack Hussein Obama II represented the 13th District for three terms in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004, when Barack Hussein Obama II ran for the U.S. Senate.
Barack Hussein Obama II received national attention in 2004, with Barack Hussein Obama II's unexpected March primary win, Barack Hussein Obama II's well-received July Democratic National Convention keynote address, and Barack Hussein Obama II's landslide November election to the U.S. Senate.
In 2008, Barack Hussein Obama II was nominated for president, a year after Barack Hussein Obama II's campaign began, and after a close primary campaign against Hillary Clinton.
Barack Hussein Obama II was elected over Republican John McCain, and was inaugurated on January 20, 2009.
Nine months later, Barack Hussein Obama II was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
During Barack Hussein Obama II's first two years in office, Barack Hussein Obama II signed more landmark legislation than any Democratic president since LBJ's Great Society.
Main reforms were the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (often referred to as "Obamacare"), the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, and the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 served as economic stimulus amidst the Great Recession, but the GOP regained control of the House of Representatives in 2011.
After a lengthy debate over the national debt limit, Barack Hussein Obama II signed the Budget Control and the American Taxpayer Relief Acts.
In foreign policy, Barack Hussein Obama II increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan, reduced nuclear weapons with the U.S.-Russian New START treaty, and ended military involvement in the Iraq War.
Barack Hussein Obama II ordered military involvement in Libya in opposition to Muammar Gaddafi, and the military operation that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden.
After winning re-election over Mitt Romney, Barack Hussein Obama II was sworn in for a second term in 2013.
During Barack Hussein Obama II's second term, Barack Hussein Obama II promoted greater inclusiveness for LGBT Americans, with Barack Hussein Obama II's administration filing briefs that urged the Supreme Court to strike down same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional (United States v. Windsor and Obergefell v. Hodges).
Barack Hussein Obama II also advocated gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and issued wide-ranging executive actions concerning climate change and immigration.
In foreign policy, Barack Hussein Obama II ordered military intervention in Iraq in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011 withdrawal from Iraq, continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan, promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global climate change, initiated the sanctions against Russia following the invasion in Ukraine, brokered a nuclear deal with Iran, and normalized U.S. relations with Cuba.
Barack Hussein Obama II left office in January 2017 with a 60% approval rating.
Barack Hussein Obama II's presidential library will be built in Chicago.